doc/compile-for-windows.md, before:

# Notes On Compiling SQLite On Windows 11

Here are step-by-step instructions on how to build SQLite from
canonical source on a new Windows 11 PC, as of 2024-10-09:

  1.  Install Microsoft Visual Studio. The free "community edition" 
      will work fine.  Do a standard install for C++ development.
      SQLite only needs the
      "cl" compiler and the "nmake" build tool.
      <ul><li><b>Note:</b>
      VS2015 or later is required for the procedures below to
      all work.  You *might* be able to get the build to work with
      earlier versions of MSVC, but in that case the TCL installation
      of step 3 will be required, since the "jimsh0.c" program of
      Autosetup that is used as a substitute for "tclsh.exe" won't
      compile with versions of Visual Studio prior to VS2015.  In any
      event, building SQLite from canonical source code on Windows
      is not supported for earlier versions of Visual Studio.</ul>

  2.  Under the "Start" menu, find "All Apps" then go to "Visual Studio 20XX"
      and find "x64 Native Tools Command Prompt for VS 20XX".  Pin that
      application to your task bar, as you will use it a lot.  Bring up
      an instance of this command prompt and do all of the subsequent steps
      in that "x64 Native Tools" command prompt.  (Or use "x86" if you want
      a 32-bit build.)  The subsequent steps will not work in a vanilla
      DOS prompt.  Nor will they work in PowerShell.

  3.  *(Optional):* Install TCL development libraries.
      This note assumes that you will
      install the TCL development libraries in the "`c:\Tcl`" directory.
      Make adjustments
      if you want TCL installed somewhere else.  SQLite needs both the
      "tclsh90.exe" command-line tool as part of the build process, and
      the "tcl90.lib" and "tclstub.lib" libraries in order to run tests.
      This document assumes you are working with TCL version 9.0.
      See versions of this document from prior to 2024-10-10 for
      instructions on how to build using TCL version 8.6.
      <ol type="a">
      <li>Get the TCL source archive, perhaps from
      <https://www.tcl.tk/software/tcltk/download.html>
      or <https://sqlite.org/tmp/tcl9.0.0.tar.gz>.
      <li>Untar or unzip the source archive.  CD into the "win/" subfolder
          of the source tree.
      <li>Run: `nmake /f makefile.vc release`
      <li>Run: `nmake /f makefile.vc INSTALLDIR=c:\Tcl install`
      <li><i>Optional:</i> CD to `c:\Tcl\bin` and make a copy of
          `tclsh90.exe` over into just `tclsh.exe`.
      <li><i>Optional:</i>
          Add `c:\Tcl\bin` to your %PATH%.  To do this, go to Settings
          and search for "path".  Select "edit environment variables for
          your account" and modify your default PATH accordingly.
          You will need to close and reopen your command prompts after
          making this change.
      </ol>

      As of 2024-10-25, TCL is not longer required for many
      common build targets, such as "sqlite3.c" or the "sqlite3.exe"
      command-line tool.  So you can skip this step if that is all
      you want to build.  TCL is still required to run "make test"
      and similar, or to build the TCL extension, of course.

  4.  Download the SQLite source tree and unpack it. CD into the
      toplevel directory of the source tree.

  5.  Run the "`Makefile.msc`" makefile with an appropriate target.
      Examples:
      <ul>
      <li>  `nmake /f makefile.msc`
      <li>  `nmake /f makefile.msc sqlite3.c`
      <li>  `nmake /f makefile.msc sqlite3.exe`
      <li>  `nmake /f makefile.msc sqldiff.exe`
      <li>  `nmake /f makefile.msc sqlite3_rsync.exe`
      </ul>
      <p>No TCL is required for the nmake targets above.  But for the ones
      that follow, you will need a TCL installation, as described in step 3
      above.  If you install TCL in some directory other than C:\\Tcl, then
      you will also need to add the "TCLDIR=<i>&lt;dir&gt;</i>" option on the
      nmake command line to tell nmake where your TCL is installed.
      <ul>
      <li>  `nmake /f makefile.msc tclextension-install`
      <li>  `nmake /f makefile.msc devtest`
      <li>  `nmake /f makefile.msc releasetest`
      <li>  `nmake /f makefile.msc sqlite3_analyzer.exe`
      </ul>

      It is not required that you run the "tclextension-install" target prior to
      running tests.  However, the tests will run more smoothly if you do.
      The version of SQLite used for the TCL extension does *not* need to
      correspond to the version of SQLite under test.  So you can install the
      SQLite TCL extension once, and then use it to test many different versions
      of SQLite.


  7.  For a debugging build of the CLI, where the ".treetrace" and ".wheretrace"
      commands work, add the DEBUG=3 argument to nmake.  Like this:
      <ul>
      <li> `nmake /f makefile.msc DEBUG=3 clean sqlite3.exe`
      </ul>
   

## 32-bit Builds

Doing a 32-bit build is just like doing a 64-bit build with the
following minor changes:

  1.  Use the "x86 Native Tools Command Prompt" instead of
      "x64 Native Tools Command Prompt".  "**x86**" instead of "**x64**".

  2.  Use a different installation directory for TCL.
      The recommended directory is `c:\tcl32`.  Thus you end up
      with two TCL builds:
      <ul>
      <li> `c:\tcl` &larr;  64-bit (the default)
      <li> `c:\tcl32` &larr;  32-bit
      </ul>

  3.  Ensure that `c:\tcl32\bin` comes before `c:\tcl\bin` on
      your PATH environment variable.  You can achieve this using
      a command like:
      <ul>
      <li>  `set PATH=c:\tcl32\bin;%PATH%`
      </ul>

## Building a DLL

The command the developers use for building the deliverable DLL on the 
[download page](https://sqlite.org/download.html) is as follows:

> ~~~~
nmake /f Makefile.msc sqlite3.dll USE_NATIVE_LIBPATHS=1 "OPTS=-DSQLITE_ENABLE_FTS3=1 -DSQLITE_ENABLE_FTS4=1 -DSQLITE_ENABLE_FTS5=1 -DSQLITE_ENABLE_RTREE=1 -DSQLITE_ENABLE_JSON1=1 -DSQLITE_ENABLE_GEOPOLY=1 -DSQLITE_ENABLE_SESSION=1 -DSQLITE_ENABLE_PREUPDATE_HOOK=1 -DSQLITE_ENABLE_SERIALIZE=1 -DSQLITE_ENABLE_MATH_FUNCTIONS=1"
~~~~

That command generates both the sqlite3.dll and sqlite3.def files.  The same
command works for both 32-bit and 64-bit builds.

## Statically Linking The TCL Library

Some utility programs associated with SQLite need to be linked
with TCL in order to function.  The [sqlite3_analyzer.exe program](https://sqlite.org/sqlanalyze.html)
is an example.  You can build as described above, and then
enter:

> ~~~~
nmake /f Makefile.msc sqlite3_analyzer.exe
~~~~

And you will end up with a working executable.  However, that executable
will depend on having the "tcl98.dll" library somewhere on your %PATH%.
Use the following steps to build an executable that has the TCL library
statically linked so that it does not depend on separate DLL:

  1.  Use the appropriate "Command Prompt" window - either x86 or
      x64, depending on whether you want a 32-bit or 64-bit executable.

  2.  Untar the TCL source tarball into a fresh directory.  CD into
      the "win/" subfolder.

  3.  Run: `nmake /f makefile.vc OPTS=static shell`

  4.  CD into the "Release*" subfolder that is created (note the
      wildcard - the full name of the directory might vary).  There
      you will find the "tcl90s.lib" file.  Copy this file into the
      same directory that you put the "tcl90.lib" on your initial
      installation.  (In this document, that directory is
      "`C:\Tcl32\lib`" for 32-bit builds and
      "`C:\Tcl\lib`" for 64-bit builds.)

  5.  CD into your SQLite source code directory and build the desired
      utility program, but add the following extra argument to the
      nmake command line:
      <blockquote><pre>
      STATICALLY_LINK_TCL=1
      </pre></blockquote>
      <p>So, for example, to build a statically linked version of
      sqlite3_analyzer.exe, you might type:
      <blockquote><pre>
      nmake /f Makefile.msc STATICALLY_LINK_TCL=1 sqlite3_analyzer.exe
      </pre></blockquote>

  6.  After your executable is built, you can verify that it does not
      depend on the TCL DLL by running:
      <blockquote><pre>
      dumpbin /dependents sqlite3_analyzer.exe
      </pre></blockquote>

Commit message:

Cross-link and otherwise improve the various how-to-compile documents. No code changes.
FossilOrigin-Name: 5e6ede92afae77ce6023f3b294dc565651631c7976d898d800988f1b3ff2e83f

doc/compile-for-windows.md, after:

# Notes On Compiling SQLite On Windows 11

Below are step-by-step instructions on how to build SQLite from
canonical source on a new Windows 11 PC, as of 2024-10-09.
See [](./compile-for-unix.md) for a similar guide for unix-like
systems, including MacOS.

  1.  Install Microsoft Visual Studio. The free "community edition" 
      will work fine.  Do a standard install for C++ development.
      SQLite only needs the
      "cl" compiler and the "nmake" build tool.
      <ul><li><b>Note:</b>
      VS2015 or later is required for the procedures below to
      all work.  You *might* be able to get the build to work with
      earlier versions of MSVC, but in that case the TCL installation
      of step 3 will be required, since the "jimsh0.c" program of
      Autosetup that is used as a substitute for "tclsh.exe" won't
      compile with versions of Visual Studio prior to VS2015.  In any
      event, building SQLite from canonical source code on Windows
      is not supported for earlier versions of Visual Studio.</ul>

  2.  Under the "Start" menu, find "All Apps" then go to "Visual Studio 20XX"
      and find "x64 Native Tools Command Prompt for VS 20XX".  Pin that
      application to your task bar, as you will use it a lot.  Bring up
      an instance of this command prompt and do all of the subsequent steps
      in that "x64 Native Tools" command prompt.  (Or use "x86" if you want
      a 32-bit build.)  The subsequent steps will not work in a vanilla
      DOS prompt.  Nor will they work in PowerShell.

  3.  *(Optional):* Install TCL development libraries.
      This note assumes that you will
      install the TCL development libraries in the "`c:\Tcl`" directory.
      Make adjustments
      if you want TCL installed somewhere else.  SQLite needs both the
      "tclsh90.exe" command-line tool as part of the build process, and
      the "tcl90.lib" and "tclstub.lib" libraries in order to run tests.
      This document assumes you are working with TCL version 9.0.
      See [](./tcl-extension-testing.md#windows) for guidance on how
      to compile TCL version 8.6 for use with SQLite.
      <ol type="a">
      <li>Get the TCL source archive, perhaps from
      <https://www.tcl.tk/software/tcltk/download.html>
      or <https://sqlite.org/tmp/tcl9.0.0.tar.gz>.
      <li>Untar or unzip the source archive.  CD into the "win/" subfolder
          of the source tree.
      <li>Run: `nmake /f makefile.vc release`
      <li>Run: `nmake /f makefile.vc INSTALLDIR=c:\Tcl install`
      <li><i>Optional:</i> CD to `c:\Tcl\bin` and make a copy of
          `tclsh90.exe` over into just `tclsh.exe`.
      <li><i>Optional:</i>
          Add `c:\Tcl\bin` to your %PATH%.  To do this, go to Settings
          and search for "path".  Select "edit environment variables for
          your account" and modify your default PATH accordingly.
          You will need to close and reopen your command prompts after
          making this change.
      </ol>

      As of 2024-10-25, TCL is not longer required for many
      common build targets, such as "sqlite3.c" or the "sqlite3.exe"
      command-line tool.  So you can skip this step if that is all
      you want to build.  TCL is still required to run "make test"
      and similar, or to build the TCL extension, of course.

  4.  Download the SQLite source tree and unpack it. CD into the
      toplevel directory of the source tree.

  5.  Run the "`Makefile.msc`" makefile with an appropriate target.
      Examples:
      <ul>
      <li>  `nmake /f makefile.msc`
      <li>  `nmake /f makefile.msc sqlite3.c`
      <li>  `nmake /f makefile.msc sqlite3.exe`
      <li>  `nmake /f makefile.msc sqldiff.exe`
      <li>  `nmake /f makefile.msc sqlite3_rsync.exe`
      </ul>
      <p>No TCL is required for the nmake targets above.  But for the ones
      that follow, you will need a TCL installation, as described in step 3
      above.  If you install TCL in some directory other than C:\\Tcl, then
      you will also need to add the "TCLDIR=<i>&lt;dir&gt;</i>" option on the
      nmake command line to tell nmake where your TCL is installed.
      <ul>
      <li>  `nmake /f makefile.msc tclextension-install`
      <li>  `nmake /f makefile.msc devtest`
      <li>  `nmake /f makefile.msc releasetest`
      <li>  `nmake /f makefile.msc sqlite3_analyzer.exe`
      </ul>

      It is not required that you run the "tclextension-install" target prior to
      running tests.  However, the tests will run more smoothly if you do.
      The version of SQLite used for the TCL extension does *not* need to
      correspond to the version of SQLite under test.  So you can install the
      SQLite TCL extension once, and then use it to test many different versions
      of SQLite.


  7.  For a debugging build of the CLI, where the ".treetrace" and ".wheretrace"
      commands work, add the DEBUG=3 argument to nmake.  Like this:
      <ul>
      <li> `nmake /f makefile.msc DEBUG=3 clean sqlite3.exe`
      </ul>
   

## 32-bit Builds

Doing a 32-bit build is just like doing a 64-bit build with the
following minor changes:

  1.  Use the "x86 Native Tools Command Prompt" instead of
      "x64 Native Tools Command Prompt".  "**x86**" instead of "**x64**".

  2.  Use a different installation directory for TCL.
      The recommended directory is `c:\tcl32`.  Thus you end up
      with two TCL builds:
      <ul>
      <li> `c:\tcl` &larr;  64-bit (the default)
      <li> `c:\tcl32` &larr;  32-bit
      </ul>

  3.  Ensure that `c:\tcl32\bin` comes before `c:\tcl\bin` on
      your PATH environment variable.  You can achieve this using
      a command like:
      <ul>
      <li>  `set PATH=c:\tcl32\bin;%PATH%`
      </ul>

## Building a DLL

The command the developers use for building the deliverable DLL on the 
[download page](https://sqlite.org/download.html) is as follows:

> ~~~~
nmake /f Makefile.msc sqlite3.dll USE_NATIVE_LIBPATHS=1 "OPTS=-DSQLITE_ENABLE_FTS3=1 -DSQLITE_ENABLE_FTS4=1 -DSQLITE_ENABLE_FTS5=1 -DSQLITE_ENABLE_RTREE=1 -DSQLITE_ENABLE_JSON1=1 -DSQLITE_ENABLE_GEOPOLY=1 -DSQLITE_ENABLE_SESSION=1 -DSQLITE_ENABLE_PREUPDATE_HOOK=1 -DSQLITE_ENABLE_SERIALIZE=1 -DSQLITE_ENABLE_MATH_FUNCTIONS=1"
~~~~

That command generates both the sqlite3.dll and sqlite3.def files.  The same
command works for both 32-bit and 64-bit builds.

## Statically Linking The TCL Library

Some utility programs associated with SQLite need to be linked
with TCL in order to function.  The [sqlite3_analyzer.exe program](https://sqlite.org/sqlanalyze.html)
is an example.  You can build as described above, and then
enter:

> ~~~~
nmake /f Makefile.msc sqlite3_analyzer.exe
~~~~

And you will end up with a working executable.  However, that executable
will depend on having the "tcl98.dll" library somewhere on your %PATH%.
Use the following steps to build an executable that has the TCL library
statically linked so that it does not depend on separate DLL:

  1.  Use the appropriate "Command Prompt" window - either x86 or
      x64, depending on whether you want a 32-bit or 64-bit executable.

  2.  Untar the TCL source tarball into a fresh directory.  CD into
      the "win/" subfolder.

  3.  Run: `nmake /f makefile.vc OPTS=static shell`

  4.  CD into the "Release*" subfolder that is created (note the
      wildcard - the full name of the directory might vary).  There
      you will find the "tcl90s.lib" file.  Copy this file into the
      same directory that you put the "tcl90.lib" on your initial
      installation.  (In this document, that directory is
      "`C:\Tcl32\lib`" for 32-bit builds and
      "`C:\Tcl\lib`" for 64-bit builds.)

  5.  CD into your SQLite source code directory and build the desired
      utility program, but add the following extra argument to the
      nmake command line:
      <blockquote><pre>
      STATICALLY_LINK_TCL=1
      </pre></blockquote>
      <p>So, for example, to build a statically linked version of
      sqlite3_analyzer.exe, you might type:
      <blockquote><pre>
      nmake /f Makefile.msc STATICALLY_LINK_TCL=1 sqlite3_analyzer.exe
      </pre></blockquote>

  6.  After your executable is built, you can verify that it does not
      depend on the TCL DLL by running:
      <blockquote><pre>
      dumpbin /dependents sqlite3_analyzer.exe
      </pre></blockquote>
